Previously…
I need to get this into my
Hitchhiker's Guide to Time Travel.
That's what you're calling it?
- I'm glad you enjoyed the class.
- Oh. I loved it.
Was looking forward
to reading the hymnal.
I'm Colonel Daniel Morgan.
Commander. Morgan's Rifles.
I'd like you to come with me.
British are moving
south. Battle is coming.
The Battle of Saratoga.
I cannot tell you how sorry I
am to have failed this mission.
An opportunity for redemption
will present itself.
I will be ready when it does.
Buck MacKenzie had me hanged.
Roger.
Can you hear anything?
It sings.
She can hear it. too.
Do you know what happened to
all the biscuits and crisps?
It was the Nuckelavee.
What do you think you're doing?
Dear Bree. we're camped near
Bemis Heights. New York.
outside of Saratoga.
Your father has accepted a
new commission as colonel
in Daniel Morgan's Rifle Corps.
You can imagine how I'm feeling.
A strange mixture of fragile optimism
and a troubling sense of unease.
knowing what I do know. and
yet. still uncertain about
what exactly might
be in store for us.
There is so much
to tell you. Bree.
But perhaps the most important
thing since I last wrote
is that I crossed paths with
your brother at Ticonderoga.
I'd been captured.
I'm safe now. thanks
to your father and Ian.
but that was when I met William.
It lifted my heart
to see him again.
though the sight of him
made my heart bleed for you.
I miss you. darling.
Bree! Brianna!
Let me do the talking.
Who the hell is this?
Allow me to introduce
the Nuckelavee.
Also known as William
Buccleigh MacKenzie.
Your servant. madam.
After Alamance. I was
ruined financially.
My wife. Morag. had a
brother in Inverness.
who'd done well for himself. and he
wrote that he might have need of a clerk.
And since I'd been a lawyer. we came
to Glasgow and made our way north.
We were nearing Inverness.
when we heard a strange noise.
It was like a hive of bees.
I thought I'd lose
my mind from it.
'Twas as though it was
coming from my bones.
'Twas at Craigh na Dun.
I'm thinking the
two of you know it.
Well. Morag stayed
with the bairns
while I went to see what it was.
And here I am.
I found my way to the
town. along the road.
with those great
roaring carriages
going by me.
But how did you come
to be at Lallybroch?
Well. I saw you
entering a shop in Inverness.
You're the only ones who might
know what's happening to me.
If you were looking for answers.
what were you doing lurking about.
scaring our children?
Only a fool would walk up to yer door.
not expect to meet wi' yer wrath.
You survived being
hanged. after all.
because of me. And you're here.
I dinna ken who or what
I was dealing with.
Move aside.
Gentlemen. I am glad
we are able to meet.
The Rebels are burning
crops as they retreat
and destroying
bridges as they cross.
Finally. some
champagne. Promising.
As with every
gain. comes a loss…
Soldiers we don't lose in
battle. we lose to desertion.
It's a disgrace.
Lily-livered is what they are.
Cowards.
Though I must confess. it
comes as little surprise.
You must find a way to bring your
men in line. General Riedesel.
It's not only Hessians deserting.
Colonel Grant. I assure you.
Enough. It will not matter.
We will be met with
reinforcements In Albany.
General Howe's men are
marching as we speak.
Our combined forces will bring
this rebellion to a close.
Provided we reach
Albany unimpeded. sir.
We haven't enough horses
to pull our supplies.
Meanwhile. the Continental
Army grows steadily.
and they're encamped
between us and our target.
But. gentlemen. they're
afraid of open confrontation.
Which is where we
shall find them
in open ground. drawing upon
our strengths. field artillery.
God help them when we do.
- Well said. General Fraser.
- This is the last push. gentlemen.
And we will prevail.
-As we always do.
-God save the King.
- God save the King.
- General Burgoyne.
A messenger arrived with
word. From General Howe.
If you do not have a seat at
this table. make your exit swift.
Captain Richardson.
Right. To more pressing matters.
- How shall I cook my turkey?
- Do you have one to cook?
No. But I sent one of my scouts
off in search for game bird. so…
-Ever the optimist.
-What are my odds?
-Wish me luck.
-We don't need luck. Sandy.
British Army's finest.
Here we go again.
Very. very good.
My horse is impressed.
You won't catch me wasting
any of this on my horse.
no matter how noble a steed.
Captain Clerke.
Excuse me. gentlemen. I must
find Mrs. Lind right away.
I have it on good authority that
Mrs. Lind is the general's mistress.
If she's being summoned this
early. it can't be good.
No. I'm afraid it's not.
Lieutenant Lord Ellesmere.
General Howe will not be
meeting us in Albany after all.
He intends to take Philadelphia.
But the American forces are
already poised for battle. sir.
Exactly right.
And General Fraser has charged
me with urgent dispatches.
It appeals to General
Clinton in New York City
to create any diversion in favor
of our army's approach to Albany.
And as those requests are
to be sent out in duplicate.
General Fraser has granted me
permission for you to act as my second.
Our victory cannot
come too soon.
General Burgoyne intends to
attack in three days' time.
You will miss it.
Mother of God. it's tasty.
but it sticks in your craw.
Do you feed this to your bairns?
Jeremiah is my son's name as
well. Is that not strange?
- Where's your wee lad and lassie?
- Christ. they'll be back soon.
So you better hurry
up with your story.
Alamance?
My employer in North Carolina
turned out for the Regulation.
So I went. too.
Morag and the bairn
stayed with me.
in a small camp.
where the next fella
she meets is you.
Did she not tell you who I was?
-That I helped her on the ship?
-Even so.
A man doesna coorie into another man's
wife with her husband ten feet away.
He was trying to warn you.
While hiding his yellow cockade?
Why would a militia man do that?
Because…
Morag is my five.
maybe six times.
I forget the number.
great-grandmother.
That makes you my grandda.
My son was named
Jeremiah after my da.
who was named for his grandda.
who was named for your son.
There may be one or two
Jeremiahs missing along the way.
We're family.
You wouldn't have anything
stronger than coffee. would you?
Do you take a little water?
If it was the rotgut I drank
in America. I'd throw it down.
Whiskey worth drinking.
Little water opens the flavor.
But you ken that. don't you?
Though you're not Scottish.
I am. on my father's side.
His name is...
Was James Fraser.
of Broch Tuarach.
Are you another. then?
Like your husband and me?
Another… whatever it is?
Yeah.
Did you find the family tree?
No.
- What year was it that you come through?
- The year of our Lord. 1778.
Oh. God. Roger. that's
Fiona and the kids.
Can you…
No. it's Rob Cameron.
Jesus Christ.
I told him he could come
for dinner some time.
-I didn't think he'd just show up.
-What?
Who doesn't call first?
You have to hide.
Not a sound.
-Impressive place.
-Oh. we like it.
Have I come at a bad time?
No. no. not at all.
We were just. um.
taking advantage of the children
being out to do some tidying up.
-It's a madhouse in there. It's…
-Oh.
Stuff everywhere. We're
renovating. You know how it is.
Hope the missus likes
a nice bottle of red.
I like a nice bottle of red.
-Well. come in. -Thank you.
After you.
Watch that chair.
- Hey. guv. - Hey.
Ah!
I see youse got
started without me.
Well. as I said. it's a
madhouse in here sometimes.
Got to have the old water
of life when you can.
Aye.
I thought you said you
were the cook around here.
You're out of luck. It's
Bree's turn tonight.
Just pretend you like
it. That's what I do.
Oh. really?
Well. um.
Slainte.
-Slainte. -Slainte.
-Cheers to you both. -Slainte.
Mm.
-Good stuff. huh? -Hmm.
Oh. by the way. I'd love to look
at your father's hymnals. seeing as
I didn't get a
chance in your class.
-If it's not too much trouble.
-No.
Let's do that right now.
-This way. -This way?
Well. I've got some more that I collected
from various travelers. peddlers
and historical research.
This is a treasure trove. Do you
mind if I copy a few of these?
Be my guest. Lovely to
keep the history alive.
I'm just gonna pop through
and see if Bree needs a hand.
Aye. Good man.
He'll be occupied
for a while. I think.
Long enough to get rid of
our other surprise guest.
Da!
- In here. honey. - We're home.
Hi.
Look what I got at school.
Hey! The Tufty Club.
Ha! I was a member of the
Tufty Club when I was your age.
Hey. you.
Oh. and it is damn near impossible
to read your power feed notes.
Are you writing them on the same paper
bag you bring your lunch to work in?
- No. No.
- No? Never thought about it?
I make sure to take my
sandwiches out first.
You should be grateful you don't have to
decipher Andy or Craig's chicken scratch.
You don't even want to
know what they're having.
-I definitely don't.
-I kind of do.
Can three men really lift up a
huge turbine? Aren't they heavy?
Oh. they're massive. You see. us
three men. we man the machines.
these multi-ton. overhead cranes. and
lift the turbines out of their nests.
First of all. to get down
there. we have to go...
The tunnels! Will you take
me to see them. Mama. please?
Oh. Honey. the tunnels are
not best suited for children.
Some might've said the same thing
about women. And they'd be wrong.
All right. you two. if you're
done. get ready for bed.
Can we watch some telly first?
Uh…
Just for a wee while. Take
your sister out to the caravan.
- Good night. - See you. Rob.
-Good night.
-Good night. big guy.
Speaking of lunch. do you guys
- never eat in the cafeteria?
- Never.
No. no. Thank you. Don't
eat in the cafeteria.
Terrible rule. I'd die
for Glenda's profiteroles.
It was a one-time thing. Soon
as you're gone. it's changed.
It's back to flapjacks and
bread and butter pudding.
Did you get Craig's note about
the rotor on the second turbine?
Yes.
He thinks that's why
the feed's reading low.
The problem might be a damaged blade
or something stuck in the wicket gate.
- Oh. well. whatever you say. guv.
- We'll schedule a repair for next week.
Well. you can count me. Greg and Andy.
Consider us your Three Musketeers.
That was wonderful. Thank you so
much. And compliments to the chef. eh?
We should do it again sometime.
Mm.
You know what would
be perfection now?
Just another wee dram. eh?
Brought you a
present. Sassenach.
Oh? What is it?
Geese or ducks this time?
No. It's a book.
- A book? - Aye.
Words printed on paper. You'll
recall the sort of thing.
Found it on the edge of the creek.
Dropped in flight. I expect.
Sassenach.
hadna realized. but.
uh. you need spectacles.
That's nonsense. I can
see perfectly well.
Mm.
Well. then read this.
How am I to read that?
It's terribly small type.
It's twelve-point Caslon.
I will say. the
leadings are terrible.
gutters are half of what
they should be. but even so.
you need spectacles. a nighean.
We'll be blind as bats
before this war is over.
Please tell me you're able to see
well enough to shoot straight.
Dinna fash. Sassenach. I can shoot
straight with my eyes closed.
Which is a good thing.
We're being mustered for
battle in three days' time.
I dinna suppose there's a spectacle
maker this side of Philadelphia.
but when we get
back to Scotland.
I will buy you a tortoiseshell
pair for every day
and a pair wi' gold
rims for Sundays.
You don't expect me to start
reading the Bible with them?
No. but a wee prayer for
me tonight couldna hurt.
You'll come back to me.
You always do.
And if you don't.
I'll come looking for you.
I ken you will. Sassenach.
Still waiting for your scout
to return with that turkey?
He'll be eating the
bird himself by now.
What I wouldn't give for
dinner at the Beefsteak Club.
General Fraser.
-May we be of service to you?
-No.
I've come with no request.
Please. fill your stomachs. I ken
they've been empty for some time.
Our dinner is not up to General
Burgoyne standards. I imagine.
We're lacking good
claret and music.
We have to find a way
to keep our spirits up.
I find my spirits are
lifted here. around the fire
with my men.
And so it shall be.
on the battlefield.
standing side by side
with my fellow soldiers.
Spirits up. glory is afoot.
Now's your chance. William.
-General Fraser. -Good.
-A moment. please.
-Secure that wheel.
But I cannot help thinking
that I should be here.
standing side by side
with these men. With you.
I know I can be of more
use on the battlefield
than in carrying dispatches.
You told General Burgoyne that we're
at a crucial point in this war.
I am no errand boy.
I'm a true soldier.
With your permission. General. I'd
like to remain here with the army.
Oh.
I canna fault you your courage.
foolhardy as it may be.
You'll be needing it if
you're to stay and fight.
If that's what you really want.
Yes.
Well.
I shall tell Captain Richardson
to find himself another messenger.
Ah. it was so nice to sit at
a table with a proper family.
Don't you have suppers
with your sister and Bobby?
Oh. aye. Aye. They're
great. But. uh…
I was married once.
Lovely French girl.
but it wasn't a
match made in heaven.
She divorced me a couple of years
ago. Took my son back to France.
Her family has money
and. well. I don't.
And it turns out the more expensive
lawyer wins in these things. so…
It's tough being
separated from family.
Aye. Aye. Anyway.
um.
thank you. For everything.
Oh. Um. I was gonna take Bobby
to the pictures tomorrow night.
Don't know if Jemmy
would like to join us.
He can spend the night
at Bobby's if he'd like.
Yeah. he'd love that.
Great. Good night then.
- Drive safe. - Cheers now.
You didn't lock it?
I didn't think I'd have to.
His name's Blake. He's an
astronaut 500 years in the future
and has lots of adventures.
You're Buck. Daddy's Roger.
Astronaut.
If my Latin serves me.
that must mean star-traveler.
Is that what we're called?
Bree!
We found the Nuckelavee.
Da. And you're related.
Aye. Cousins. And I apologized.
He's not really
that scary. Mummy.
How has he already gotten Jem
and Mandy to be on his side?
Um…
He has his own wee Jeremiah.
He must be missing his children.
He's had a rough go of it. Why don't
we let him sleep in the house tonight?
I can't exactly send him
back to the dovecote. can I?
The man in there is not the
enemy I met at Alamance.
He's… He's Cousin Buck.
And he knows that now. too.
Fine. We'll make up the
couch in the dining room.
- Okay.
- Kids are in the trailer with us anyway.
But I do not want him hanging around
the house when we're not there.
Well. I can't take him to
the school with me tomorrow.
Can you take him
to work with you?
I guess. But on Saturday...
On Saturday. I'll take him
back to the stones. I promise.
-So you've already forgiven him?
-Yes.
I did. Right after I
beat him into the ground.
Thought that was 'cause
he scared the kids.
Oh. A few of those
punches were for me. too.
Either way. it felt good.
Must be unsettling to
see things so changed.
It is that.
And yet. there is much
that hasna changed.
Up there.
Aye.
As they always were.
And yet. all the
people are gone.
All of them.
Morag…
She was with child.
My children are all dead.
When you first came through and
you realized what had happened.
why didn't you go back
into the circle then?
I canna say I realized right
away what had happened.
But I kent it was
something terrible.
and that the stones
were to do wi' it.
So I was wary of them.
But you didn't even try?
For the sake of your family?
What were you thinking about when you
first came through? Anything particular?
Why have you brought me here?
I ken you want to keep an eye
on me when you're not home.
Is there something
still bothering you?
Yeah. I want to know
why you're here.
You do want to go back to
Morag and Jeremiah. don't you?
Can you help me do that?
The ring you're wearing.
The gemstone is missing because
of the journey you made.
For some reason. you
need one to travel.
If we can find you another gem.
you'll be able to go back again.
And if you think of your family.
it should steer you toward them.
Hi. guv.
Hey.
This is Buck MacKenzie.
Roger's cousin. He's visiting.
-This is Rob Cameron.
-Nice to meet you.
Um. is it okay if I pick Jemmy up
at 05:00? The film starts at 6:00.
-Yeah. Sounds perfect.
-I'll see you then.
Well. uh.
enjoy the view.
What?
Smiling a bit too much in
yer direction methinks.
All right.
That's how people treat each other
these days. It's called kindness.
You might give it a try.
I'm only saying. I'm no fool.
What are you doing in here?
Of all the things I've seen…
Have you been inside one?
A few times. Aye.
Flew home from America in one after
going through the stones on Ocracoke.
My Jeremiah would love this.
That's one of Jem's favorites.
but. uh. maybe you could
take it back with you
if he's willing to part with it.
That Mr. Cameron I met today.
he's trouble.
He's got a hot eye for yer wife.
You think everyone has a hot
eye. which is why I ended up
with a noose around my neck.
Any other man in my time
would have thought the same.
A man is born knowing when
someone is preying on their woman.
Well. you were wrong.
And this isn't your time.
Only thought I should tell you.
There's something
I should tell you.
I think.
I did find the
MacKenzie family tree.
And. uh. I didn't know
whether to tell you because…
I… I don't even know
if it's correct.
But I saw the year
of your death.
Do you want to know?
No.
But I'd like you
to tell me anyway.
It was marked as 1778.
Which could mean that you never
make it back to your own time.
And because of that. your
family presumed you were dead.
So it could be wrong.
Or.
I do make it back and…
Yes.
There is that. too.
At the dam. I got the feeling
he doesn't want to go back.
I didn't advise him
one way or the other.
I just thought he should know
about the year of his death.
There were things he
thought I should know. too.
Like?
Well.
he thinks Rob Cameron
has a hot eye for you.
Well. that's ridiculous.
You've had dinner with him.
You know what he's like.
Aye.
A wee bit flirty.
Rob's just a lonely divorcee.
All the more reason to
be pining after you.
I'm his boss.
I think he takes a
little too much pleasure
in calling you guv.
Roger MacKenzie.
are you feeling a
wee bit territorial?
What if I am?
Hmm?
I know the modern man isn't
supposed to be possessive.
but what if tonight I'm
feeling a little more
primal?
Who are you then?
What's happening?
Ian captured a British deserter.
Said Burgoyne's mustered 1.500 men to
test the strength of our left wing.
Morgan's leading
the charge again?
Will you kiss me. Claire?
Always.
Fix bayonets.
Company. prepare
to fix bayonets.
Fix
bayonets.
Attention!
Who do you think has a better
bosom? Mrs. Lind or the baroness?
I prefer not to comment
on such a vulgar topic.
- This is it. Hammond.
- I see. Evading the question.
You have an eye for
someone. What's her name?
It's unlikely I'll
ever see her again.
It won't matter if you tell
me her name. then. will it?
It's Rachel.
But she's...
Hammond.
Artillery. fire!
Lieutenant Hammond!
- Get up. - Artillery!
-Fire! -Fire!
Fire!
Rifles ready!
Please. Sandy.
Infantry. advance!
Infantry. forward march!
Lord Ellesmere! To your men!
To your men!
Jemmy. he's gone. He's gone!
Hey. Jemmy's fine. He's just gone to
stay with his friend Bobby tonight.
-He'll be home tomorrow.
-No. he's gone.
He's not here.
It's okay. baby.
He's just at Bobby's.
No. he's not here.
What do you mean by
not here. sweetheart?
He's not here with me.
Their connection.
Hush now. sweetheart.
hush. Tell me.
What made you wake up?
Did you have a bad dream?
Those stones. they
screamed at me.
And then what happened. a leannan?
Did you go close to the stone?
Not me. Jem.
That bad man took him.
- I'll check with Buck.
- I'll call Bobby's mom.
Come on. sweetie. It's gonna
be all right. okay? Come on.
What is all this racket?
Mandy's had a nightmare.
You haven't seen Jem. have you?
He's with Cameron. is he not?
Roger! It was Rob.
Jem isn't with Bobby. I spoke to
his mom. and there was no movie.
There was no sleepover. Rob
lives across the street from her.
I made her go look.
and his car is gone.
The letters.
Someone disturbed
the box in the study.
I saw it just now.
He's read the letters.
Why should this trusdair
take your son to the stones?
He read my guide for
time travel by accident.
He pretended to think it was something
I made up for fun. But he knew. He knew.
Then he read those letters.
Bloody hell!
This Cameron. one like us then?
I don't know. I
don't bloody know.
-There are others. though? -Aye.
My mother-in-law. an Indian
I met in the Colonies. and…
Oh. God. Geillis Duncan.
Geillis bloody Duncan.
I wrote about her belief in the need
for a blood sacrifice to travel.
Shit. Christ. why did
I write that down?
Here. Quickly.
It's a torch. Come on.
Rob!
Jemmy!
Cameron!
Roger.
March through mud
to fight in mud.
Dig in the mud…
…to bury the muddy dead.
- Let's have this over with.
- Aye.
- It's deep enough. god damn it!
- Keep digging.
- It's deep enough I tell you.
- I tell you it is not!
Pick up your
shovels. all of you.
These men died bravely. And we did not
retrieve their bodies from the field
only to see them pulled out of shallow
graves and devoured in the night.
We dig deeper.
The British Army has
weathered the storm.
as we knew we would.
Best army in the world.
The victory and
the glory is ours.
Huzzah!
Lieutenant Gruenwald.
we barely held ground.
And yet. here we stand.
If General Burgoyne can convince
us that we are victorious.
then we have prevailed.
Lieutenant Hammond is dead.
- An honorable death.
- And I lived to tell the tale.
They sent forth men to battle.
but no such men return.
So says Aeschylus.
You're a different man now.
They sent forth men to battle.
but no such men return.
And home. to claim their
welcome. come ashes in an urn.